For you, yeah, just for you to understand if things
NOTE CONF
are OK, that's all, yeah.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Let's start the session.
All right, so I'm a bit disappointed about the numbers.
NOTE CONF
I think numbers are already going low for those who
are Sitting back home and listening to the recording, I,
NOTE CONF
I'll show you coming to these lectures live.
will actually show some, will actually be more efficient for
NOTE CONF
you.
It's like proportional to the commitment you're making, you won't
NOTE CONF
be distracted, hopefully.
So, yeah, please do come to the lectures rather than
NOTE CONF
rely on the recording.
So, today is a very beautiful topic.
NOTE CONF
Quiet, please.
So, today is a pretty beautiful topic.
NOTE CONF
And What we'll do is try and work out through
the details of it.
NOTE CONF
We're going to talk about Burrows-Wheeler transform of a string.
So, really, the main developments around this topic started with
NOTE CONF
the publication in the IBM tech report by Burroughs and
Wheeler and back in 1994, now it turns out.
NOTE CONF
Quiet please.
It turns out that This IBM tech report.
NOTE CONF
Um, Settle down, yeah, please.
Um, this IBM tech report really, um, got published when
NOTE CONF
Burrows was a postdoctoral student of David Wheeler at Cambridge.
David Wheeler is a famous mathematician.
NOTE CONF
Well, he happened to have worked out this transformation back
in the 1970s and then did this transformation and said,
NOTE CONF
well this is so obvious that everyone will know and
put it off into his drawer.
NOTE CONF
And Burroughs, when he joined him as a postdoctoral fellow,
he kind of, Was rummaging through his drawer one day
NOTE CONF
and found this beautiful nugget, and he said, come on,
this can't, it's not obvious, it is obvious in hindsight,
NOTE CONF
not obvious in foresight, so beau some beautiful ideas are
so beautiful that they give you the illusion of saying,
NOTE CONF
ah, even I could have done this, right?
Um, but it is basically, it's after you go through
NOTE CONF
the thinking that you realise that in fact it's a
very easy thinking too why this transformation is so beautiful
NOTE CONF
and it has this properties.
The original paper focused on compression.
NOTE CONF
Now it turns out that um.
Uh, it turns out that Ferragina and Manzini published this
NOTE CONF
paper in Uh, Foundations of Computer Science, which is a
very, so, uh, it's a, it's the Foundations of Computer
NOTE CONF
Science is a top notch theoretical computer science conference for
those, um, these days conferences in computer science have become
NOTE CONF
a bit crazy, but at least in those old good
old days you had some solid contributions being.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, appearing in some, some foundational compu computer science
conferences, Foundation of computer science happens to be that in
NOTE CONF
fact some of you might have heard of Shore's algorithm
for, um, the, uh, uh, integer factor.
NOTE CONF
Factorization of integers that appeared in Foundation of Computer Science
at that quality um conference where Ferragina came up with
NOTE CONF
this beautiful insight that not only can you use the
Burrows-Wilers transform for compression, you could actually use it for.
NOTE CONF
Uh, use it as a search index to do efficient
pattern matching.
NOTE CONF
Now, Again, it's one of those ideas where you'd, you'd
wonder why um Burroughs and Wheeler themselves did not see
NOTE CONF
the link to pattern matching.
I, in fact, was at a conference when back in,
NOTE CONF
um, like 17 years ago, when I met Ferregina, I
asked him that, hey, uh, the paper was published in
NOTE CONF
1994, for the tech report and uh Foundations of Computer
Science paper appeared in 200, I think it was 2009
NOTE CONF
when I met him at an algorithms conference and I
asked him why, why was such a big gap in
NOTE CONF
recognising this link.
Then he said he was surprised too, but he was
NOTE CONF
quite glad that nobody published it before they did.
So hopefully I'll convince you that all this um construction
NOTE CONF
of Burrows wheelers transform and searching using it as a
search index is Perhaps the a very easy algorithm to
NOTE CONF
master, it is a very easy algorithm to master.
Just pay attention to this thing.
NOTE CONF
You should get most of it, some fine, uh hazy
details you can work out at the very, um, in
NOTE CONF
your, in a quiet time, yeah.
So we'll go work through an example.
NOTE CONF
So, first things first.
Um, we will start with A suffix array of a
NOTE CONF
string.
It should have been taught in 2004, uh, but apparently
NOTE CONF
dropped in um semester two of 2025.
But never mind, we don't have to worry about the
NOTE CONF
specific algorithm they are teaching.
We'll first find out what suffix array is for those
NOTE CONF
who don't know.
If you have a string, Google, Google, which is the
NOTE CONF
word Google comes from the word G 00 G O
L, which is 10 to 100, yeah, so that's what
NOTE CONF
it, it's taken to be.
10 to 100 is a, it's a name number, Google.
NOTE CONF
Um and And then if you append a dollar sign,
a terminal character dollar at the very end, so Google
NOTE CONF
dollar.
The dollar is treated to be the smallest letter of
NOTE CONF
all letters that you see.
It's a convention.
NOTE CONF
OK.
Whatever the terminal character you choose, there's no, no reason
NOTE CONF
you have to use dollar.
Any terminal character is anything that is treated to be
NOTE CONF
smaller than any other character in that string.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
So if you take that, um, string, Google dollar, and
write down its list of suffixes, so there you go.
NOTE CONF
So you have.
Suffix starting at position one, if I can write it.
NOTE CONF
Can't seem to get the.
Been working Just 1 2nd.
NOTE CONF
I'll just try and see what's wrong with this wretched
thing.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, doesn't work, but um we'll work with what we
have on hand.
NOTE CONF
So, the first, um, suffix is G 00 G O
L dollar.
NOTE CONF
So a string is a suffix of itself.
The second one is the one suffix starting at position
NOTE CONF
200 G O L dollar.
Third would, would be OGOL dollar.
NOTE CONF
So you have a list of suffixes.
If the total length of the string, including the dollar
NOTE CONF
is 7.
You have 7 suffixes.
NOTE CONF
Is everyone clear of what's on the left hand side?
Now, if I sorted this, these suffixes, I get.
NOTE CONF
The same suffixes in a lexicographically sorted order, obviously.
Now, what this column is telling you is where each
NOTE CONF
of those suffixes started.
So, dollar started was the 7th suffix starting at position
NOTE CONF
7, ending in position 7.
So that's the, the smallest suffix.
NOTE CONF
The next would be GOL dollar.
That's starting at 4, next would be G 00 G
NOTE CONF
L do starting at 1.
The next would be L do starting at 6 and
NOTE CONF
so on.
So can you see that you have the column telling
NOTE CONF
you the positions where the suffixes start in a sorted
order.
NOTE CONF
OK, is that blatantly clear?
So when you talk about a suffix array, that red
NOTE CONF
bit, the numbers in the red column, if I write
it as a, an array of numbers, that is a
NOTE CONF
suffix array.
So, and that suffix array has a lot of information
NOTE CONF
that you could exploit for various things, OK?
And we will sort of the the uh the um
NOTE CONF
relevance of the suffix array to Burrows-Wilers transform will become
apparent in a bit.
NOTE CONF
So one of the things that you could do with
a suffix array is to, if you can find, if
NOTE CONF
you have an efficient algorithm to find a suffix array,
you can find what the this.
NOTE CONF
These blessed Burroughs-Wheeler transform is meant to be.
So you can compute Burroughs-Wheeler transform after computing a suffix
NOTE CONF
array.
OK, that's the pathway, the algorithmic pathway is given a
NOTE CONF
string, compute its suffix array, and compute its Burrows-Wheeler transform.
Now, because you haven't learned any.
NOTE CONF
Algorithm to compute any smarter algorithm to compute the uh
suffix array, what would you do?
NOTE CONF
You simply have to sort those suffixes, isn't it?
The most basic method, you know, sorting algorithms, you have
NOTE CONF
N strings, you're sorting N strings in the sorted order
and you get the suffix array of the string.
NOTE CONF
Is that Sort of, uh, self-evident that if you did
nothing else, you'd be sorting.
NOTE CONF
Now, can someone reflect on the complexity of generating a
suffix array by explicit sorting of these suffixes?
NOTE CONF
Anyone wants to consider?
Answer So what kind of sorting, let's assume you're using
NOTE CONF
comparison-based sorting.
Yes, sir.
NOTE CONF
Use a heat OK, let's do a heap.
So what would that complexity be if you were using
NOTE CONF
a heap, heap sort?
Not quite.
NOTE CONF
It won't be linear so heaps sort is log in
if you were doing under certain assumptions.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, because You're essentially, your hippifying would be linear.
But then you have to extract, um, this, the heap
NOTE CONF
in a sorted order that would be um login, you
have to do an extracts, extract mins that would be
NOTE CONF
in login.
So that would be heap sort.
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
Suffix tree.
NOTE CONF
No, think about just sorting and strings.
Uh, we don't need any fancy data structures.
NOTE CONF
In fact, let's say Quicksort, if you're doing, can you
do quick sort on strings?
NOTE CONF
Of course, obviously, we can do quicksor on strings in
the strings.
NOTE CONF
All you need is a comparator, right?
So you need a comparison operation.
NOTE CONF
Is, well, how would you do uh quick sort on
numbers is something less than or equal to or greater
NOTE CONF
than I don't know if you've, if you've read about
Dutch national flag.
NOTE CONF
OK, so you would basically have these three groups of
everything you have a pivot, everything less than the pivot
NOTE CONF
equal to pivot and greater than the pivot, and then
you're recursively assaulting it.
NOTE CONF
So that requires this less than and equal to and
greater than.
NOTE CONF
So effectively, you need the same sort of comparison for
strings, yes.
NOTE CONF
That's perfect.
So what it would do is it will take N2
NOTE CONF
log N.
It's actually sorting using the worst case complexity of sorting
NOTE CONF
is N log N.
But it takes an extra factor of N N 2
NOTE CONF
log N, because the comparison is order N.
So that's basically N log N times N.
NOTE CONF
So it's N2 login.
So that's why you have this complexity of doing this.
NOTE CONF
So you sort of know of an algorithm, if I
gave you a list of strings, sort it using um
NOTE CONF
any sort algorithm, um, and then you would basically get
a suffix array.
NOTE CONF
Now, what, let's explore how you could first, haven't you
defined what Burrows-Wheeler transform is.
NOTE CONF
So next slide, we'll do that.
Now think about the same string.
NOTE CONF
So we'll read this later on, but just follow my
direction here.
NOTE CONF
So if you have this strings, by the way, in,
in my, in this rendition, when I say a string.
NOTE CONF
If a string is given to you, you have appended
a dollar sign at the end.
NOTE CONF
The terminal is given, yeah.
So let's say that you have some string.
NOTE CONF
The nth character, the last character would be the dollar
sign.
NOTE CONF
I'm assuming I'm making an assumption that you've already appended
the dollar sign.
NOTE CONF
So when I, so let's say that if I've given
a string, Google, you appended the dollar sign.
NOTE CONF
Now look at this matrix M.
So let's look at this matrix M, which is essentially.
NOTE CONF
I'll just go back one step.
Can you see that I have greyed, greyed out some
NOTE CONF
parts, the parts beyond the dollar sign, terminal sign.
But if it's not grey out, What if I went,
NOTE CONF
if I generated this matrix without the grey part, do
you see, these are cyclic rotations of the string.
NOTE CONF
The first string is G 00 G O L dollar.
Next one is starting at O, second position, 00 G
NOTE CONF
O L dollar going back, G.
That's why you have a G there.
NOTE CONF
So third one is starting OGOL dollar going around GO.
That's why you have a GO here.
NOTE CONF
Fourth would be GOL dollar GOO.
That's why you have GOO.
NOTE CONF
Do you see that it's essentially sort what you have
on the left hand side is actually cyclic rotations of
NOTE CONF
a string.
A string is cyclically rotated by one position each time.
NOTE CONF
You understand what I mean by that?
So if I sorted the Suffixes, it is the same
NOTE CONF
as sorting the cyclic rotations, but that's because we assumed
dollar was a unique character.
NOTE CONF
So any string which has a dollar at that position,
you would have.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you would never have that dollar be the same
to any other, any other character when you're sorting it,
NOTE CONF
right?
So your, your, uh, dollar will be the part where
NOTE CONF
strings have to either become.
Less than or uh are smaller than or greater than,
NOTE CONF
OK?
So whatever sorting you have done on the suffixes is
NOTE CONF
same as sorting the cyclic rotations and the slide is
essentially showing you the sorting of the cyclic rotation.
NOTE CONF
So what you have is this matrix, forget about the
colours here, the same matrix that you saw without those
NOTE CONF
things, um.
Without the part beyond the dollar sign masked out.
NOTE CONF
So it's if I ignore the grey mask, you essentially
will see this matrix, and it's the same suffix array,
NOTE CONF
if you can see, that's because sorting of suffixes is
the same as sorting off cyclic rotations of the string
NOTE CONF
because dollar sign is a unique one and it's considered
to be lexicographically smaller than any other character in the
NOTE CONF
string.
There's only $1 per row.
NOTE CONF
So to speak.
So So what is a Burrows-Wheeler transform?
NOTE CONF
So if you took the string, whatever string was given
to you, here it's Google dollar and wrote down the
NOTE CONF
These all possible cyclic rotations, cyclic permutations in a sorted
order.
NOTE CONF
So that's the order is this.
Then the last letters in the last column is the
NOTE CONF
Burrows-Whelas transform.
So Burrosuela's transform is essentially a string.
NOTE CONF
In fact, the string of the same length as your
original string, so it has transformed from Google dollar to
NOTE CONF
a string which is L dollar in this specific example.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
Now?
I, I did say that you could compute.
NOTE CONF
You could compute the Burrows-Wheeler transform from suffix array.
What I've told you is the definition of what is
NOTE CONF
Burrows-Wheeler transform with respect to a cyclic rotation matrix, M.
But if all I had was a suffix array, if
NOTE CONF
I had those red numbers, how would I tell what
that characters in the last column will be?
NOTE CONF
Yes, index minus 1.
Very good.
NOTE CONF
The reason is it's cyclic, isn't it?
So everything is is a cycle, right?
NOTE CONF
So everything is a, it's a, these are like we
have written it as a linear string, but if you
NOTE CONF
go to the right of L, you'll come to F.
OK, if you go to the, so think of this
NOTE CONF
to be a cylinder with letters on it.
If you have to visualise it, think of a cylinder
NOTE CONF
with these columns.
So if you're going to the last column and you
NOTE CONF
take one more step, you come to the first.
So what the suffix array is giving you is the
NOTE CONF
index of where the suffixes start.
I want to know what is the.
NOTE CONF
Letter corresponding to 7 in the last column of M.
So if I do 7 minus 1, what would I
NOTE CONF
get?
6, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
7 minus 1 is 6.
So 6 would be L in the original string.
NOTE CONF
So the first letter of that last column, if I
had this number, would be 7 minus 16, and look
NOTE CONF
at what the character in, in S of 6 would
be, that's L.
NOTE CONF
I can't seem to write it on this wretched thing.
I'll actually try and bring it down into I'll just
NOTE CONF
close this for a moment, or maybe.
That It should be able to respond to this, but
NOTE CONF
I don't know what's the matter.
Um, Well, I'll go to the board at some point,
NOTE CONF
but it would be nice if I could have, let's
see if I'll, I'll do one more tack.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes it just requires me to redo this thing.
Um, let's see.
NOTE CONF
Yup.
No, it doesn't seem to work.
NOTE CONF
All right, so What I'm, so, um, 7 minus 1
is 6, L of uh S of 6 is L,
NOTE CONF
that would be the first letter of the Burroughs-Wheeler uh
transform.
NOTE CONF
Then the next element in the suffix array is 44
minus 1 is 3.
NOTE CONF
S of 3 would be, oh, that would be the
second letter of the Burrows-Wilers transform.
NOTE CONF
Now, it's a one-base indexing.
What is 1 minus 1 cyclically in one-based?
NOTE CONF
It's not 0.
It is The last one, because if you, you're, it's
NOTE CONF
a cyclic string, if you go towards the left, you
come towards the right, right end, yeah, so one is
NOTE CONF
1 base indexing here.
So by the way, I should have said that the
NOTE CONF
suffix array is in a 1-based index and when you
write it on a programme, you'll be, you'll get that
NOTE CONF
in a zero-based indexing, right?
So that's all it is.
NOTE CONF
So 1 minus 1, what is left of 1?
Left of 1 is actually 7 because there's no 0.
NOTE CONF
So if you go to the left of 1, it's
cyclic string, so you get 7.
NOTE CONF
So what is S of 7, that's a dollar.
6 minus 1 is 5, S of 5 is 0.
NOTE CONF
3 minus 1 is 2, that's an organ.
5 minus 1 is 4, that's a G.
NOTE CONF
2 minus 1 is 1, that's a G.
So you're, if I gave you a suffix array, you
NOTE CONF
can compute its Burrows-Wheeler transform.
So all I have said in these first slides is
NOTE CONF
that if you have a string, the last column of
the cyclic permutation matrix is the Burrows-Wheeler transform, and you
NOTE CONF
could compute the Burrows-Wheelers transform if you have the suffix
array.
NOTE CONF
That's all I've, I've said, right?
Is everyone clear so far?
NOTE CONF
This is fundamental for you to understand anything that goes
afterwards.
NOTE CONF
Any questions?
OK, so, Now I did say that if you did
NOTE CONF
explicit sorting, it's N2 log N.
If you learned the algorithm, um, Uh, that we were
NOTE CONF
we were teaching.
It's a shame because I, I, uh, before year 2017
NOTE CONF
I was teaching 2004 and I developed much of what
you have seen.
NOTE CONF
Dan Daniel Anderson was my tutor when I hired him,
uh, to write those notes, so I'm a bit sad
NOTE CONF
that, that, that algorithm has been removed, but, um, that's
fine.
NOTE CONF
I'm pretty sure they're teaching something better.
Um, no, that wasn't, that wasn't snarky.
NOTE CONF
No, that was, that was that no, that was, that
was sincere.
NOTE CONF
Uh, sorry, if I came across, yeah, sorry.
So, uh, I'll not dig myself any deeper.
NOTE CONF
Um, So prefix doubling, if you learned that would be
N 2 N.
NOTE CONF
So obviously, it's much faster than N2 logN if you're
doing explicit sorting.
NOTE CONF
But even if you haven't learned this prefix doubling, By
the end of next week, and I think most of
NOTE CONF
you are who have have the baggage of reading the,
um, uh, talking to previous things, you'll say youkinen's algorithm,
NOTE CONF
the most toughest algorithm, and so on.
So once you learn youkinen's algorithm, you should be able
NOTE CONF
to write.
Use the suffix tree construction in linear time to compute
NOTE CONF
the suffix array in linear time.
In fact, I will just say that the linear time
NOTE CONF
construction of suffix array is asymptotically optimal.
In fact, what we will be learning next week is
NOTE CONF
to construct a suffix tree in uh in linear time.
From that, a suffix array is a.
NOTE CONF
Direct way of computing um a suffix array in linear
time.
NOTE CONF
It's called the Carkons DC-3 Der Comodulo 3.
It's again one of those beautiful things.
NOTE CONF
I would have loved to teach that algorithm too, um,
but we have only so much to fit into a
NOTE CONF
thing.
But for those who really want to get their um
NOTE CONF
cerebral.
Um, aspects stimulated, the real neurons stimulator, not the artificial
NOTE CONF
neurons to G AI I think should consider reading that.
It's a beautiful algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So, never mind, we will get a linear time algorithm
to construct a BWT.
NOTE CONF
Now, and Once you have done that, we've already seen
that if you have uh a suffix array, then just
NOTE CONF
subtracting one gives you uh BWT.
So the complexity after, so if you're constructed a suffix
NOTE CONF
array in linear time, computing these Burrows-Wow transform is linear,
because it's for every index, you have to subtract one
NOTE CONF
and get the letter, that's constant effort per, per um
number in the suffix array.
NOTE CONF
So that's linear.
So overall that will be linear.
NOTE CONF
Now, with this, let's now see how beautiful this data
structure is.
NOTE CONF
OK.
You just said this is some transformation of the string.
NOTE CONF
We know that suffix, um, uh, we know that Burrows-Wilis
transform is some string.
NOTE CONF
And, but what's the whole point of the many sum
strings?
NOTE CONF
What's so beautiful about this transformation?
Now, to understand this, I want you to stare at
NOTE CONF
the cyclic rotation matrix.
And if you look at any column in that cyclic
NOTE CONF
rotation matrix, it would be some permutation of the original
string.
NOTE CONF
You understand what a permutation is, right?
Some reordering of letters of the original string.
NOTE CONF
So, the original string has G 00 GOL dollar.
Look into any column, you will have G 00 GOL
NOTE CONF
dollar in some order.
Those letters will be there scrambled, yeah.
NOTE CONF
And so the reason why this should be the case,
it should be obvious, uh something that I want you
NOTE CONF
to ponder about.
So every first thing you have to say is every,
NOTE CONF
um, Every sort of column, not just the column highlighted,
but any column, is a permutation of the original string.
NOTE CONF
In fact, by that definition, Burroughs-Wheeler's transformation column, I will
be interchanging when I say last column, I really mean
NOTE CONF
Burroughs-Wheeler's transformation.
So when I say last column, that's interchangeable with BWT.
NOTE CONF
So the last column, which is the BWT, is some
permutation of the original string.
NOTE CONF
Now, there's more structure to this M.
So we are not worried about M, but M is
NOTE CONF
a good reference point to understand.
M is the, the entire matrix of these um sorted
NOTE CONF
um cyclic rotations of the string.
So, but there's a lot of structure in M which
NOTE CONF
we'll understand first.
So if you took any sliding window of two columns,
NOTE CONF
so that's in mathematics, it's called 2 grammes or 2
MR.
NOTE CONF
If you have a sliding window of K, it'll be
K gramme or KMR.
NOTE CONF
So, if you took any sliding window of two successive
columns, so it's a sliding window means that if you
NOTE CONF
have any two successive columns, then.
The two characters in those columns would be a permutation
NOTE CONF
of all possible.
2 grammes or 2 M in the original string.
NOTE CONF
So if you look, you have, if you take a
sliding window of 2 and slide it over this, so
NOTE CONF
GO, you would find a GO here.
00, you would find an OO there.
NOTE CONF
OG, you would basically find an OG uh there.
GO, another GO OL you will find an OL1 dollar,
NOTE CONF
you'll find an L dollar.
Remember this cyclic dollar G, you'll also find dollar G,
NOTE CONF
yeah.
So, and in fact there's nothing special of those about
NOTE CONF
those two columns that I've highlighted.
Any two successive columns, they have to be next to
NOTE CONF
each other.
If you looked, looked at them, they would be, they
NOTE CONF
would contain all permutations of tumours.
Now, in fact, I already said I The last column
NOTE CONF
precedes the first column, so I want you to remember
this in this lecture, just internalise this, that last comes
NOTE CONF
before first.
Last before 1, L before F, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So, L capital L, the last column, all the letters
in that come before the first in the cyclic order.
NOTE CONF
So if you go left, Uh, around, you get the
first letters in the first column.
NOTE CONF
So all, so all the letters L dollar, OG, dollar
00 L 00 G O G O, there will be
NOTE CONF
two, some permutation of 2 grammes in this thing.
And I've already stated that there's nothing special about this
NOTE CONF
2 successive.
If you did 3 successive, you get all possible sliding
NOTE CONF
window, 3 streamers.
Treamers would be take a sliding window of size 3
NOTE CONF
and slide along the string in a circle.
You'll see all possible streamers in any 3 successive columns.
NOTE CONF
OK, now.
With that insight, I want to convince you that BW2
NOTE CONF
is invertible.
So like a function.
NOTE CONF
Remember, we have done a lot of transformations of the
function.
NOTE CONF
If you function takes in an input, it gives you
an output.
NOTE CONF
Think about BWT2 to be a function that takes a
string as an input and gives you out another string,
NOTE CONF
like in mathematics, it gives you another string.
Which is a permutation of the original string.
NOTE CONF
Now, what is a function inverse in um in uh
mathematics?
NOTE CONF
If you take an inverse, apply the inverse of the
function to the output, you should get the input, right?
NOTE CONF
So if I inverted the Burrows-Wheeler transform, I should be
able to get the original string.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
So inversion is a very cute property it has.
NOTE CONF
That means that you can throw away the original string.
Use the BWT of S, which is the last column,
NOTE CONF
L1 to N, that's why I'm calling, character 123, all
the way to character N of the last column.
NOTE CONF
And then you could be able, you could invert it,
you could invert it to get the original strings.
NOTE CONF
Now, This is really, really cute.
I mean, the fact that it's going to be used
NOTE CONF
for, um, used for pattern matching is a different Is
even more magical, but this is already a very puzzling.
NOTE CONF
Why, why is that invertible?
Uh, what, what, what about it is so invertible, and
NOTE CONF
it's quite easy to see why, but let's persist.
About what could be a, a dumb way to, to
NOTE CONF
invert it.
What would be the clever way of inverting it?
NOTE CONF
OK.
So let's do the simple way of doing it.
NOTE CONF
OK, so what, so what do we, what are we
assuming here that we have no other Information except for
NOTE CONF
the Burrows-Wheeler transform.
So you don't know what the original string is, you're
NOTE CONF
blind.
You're blind to the original string, you want to invert
NOTE CONF
it to get the original string, OK?
Now, So if you had, all you had is this
NOTE CONF
letters LO dollar OOGG.
I've written it in the column order, there's no reason
NOTE CONF
why you can't write it in the um row order,
but I've just written it as a column order because
NOTE CONF
we, I want you to think about that to be
the last column of the cyclic rotation matrix.
NOTE CONF
Now, if you sorted the letters.
In the Burrows Wheeler transform column, the last column.
NOTE CONF
You get letters in a sorted order.
Dollar, G G L 000.
NOTE CONF
Dollar is the smallest letter.
Do you see that that corresponds to the first column
NOTE CONF
in M?
We don't have M.
NOTE CONF
We just know that it has to be the first
column of the cyclic, sorted cyclic rotation matrix.
NOTE CONF
Why is that the case?
It's in the definition.
NOTE CONF
It's sorted, cyclic rotation, which means that the first column
has to be sorted.
NOTE CONF
That'll be the primary key of your sort.
If they're the same, you distinguish based on the 2nd
NOTE CONF
column.
If they're the same, you distinguish based on the 3rd.
NOTE CONF
The 1st column will have to have these letters.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Do you all agree?
Now, what do we say about which precedes, which column
NOTE CONF
precedes which in terms of last and first?
Don't, didn't we just say the last comes before first?
NOTE CONF
Last is always before first.
So, I have this trick.
NOTE CONF
If this is a naive method, don't ever do this.
We'll do.
NOTE CONF
If I have a trick, I know this was the
last column.
NOTE CONF
I have just reconstructed the first column, which is a
sorted one.
NOTE CONF
I'll glue them together in that order, last before first.
Now I have $1 OG dollar G O L 00
NOTE CONF
G 00 G O.
Now, but we said.
NOTE CONF
Those two successive columns is some permutation of all possible
2 grammes tumours in the string.
NOTE CONF
So if I then sorted that, those two, I get
dollar G, G O G 0 $1.00 G O L
NOTE CONF
00.
Do you all agree that I've just sorted, right?
NOTE CONF
I just glued last.
So from last I first computed the first, then glued
NOTE CONF
last in the 1st to compute.
When I sorted it, I reconstructed the first two columns
NOTE CONF
of M.
But did I not say that last comes before first?
NOTE CONF
And 1st comes before 2nd.
Now I have.
NOTE CONF
1st and 2nd.
Last comes before 1st and 2nd.
NOTE CONF
I have 3 grammes sorted.
I have the 1st 3 columns of M.
NOTE CONF
But did I say last comes before the 1st, and
1st comes before the 2nd, 2nd comes before the 3rd,
NOTE CONF
so I can keep repeating this step, you see where
the drift is, right?
NOTE CONF
So if I keep repeating this, I will construct the
entire M.
NOTE CONF
If I constructed the entire M, will I be able
to find out what the original string is?
NOTE CONF
How?
The very first row, because it's sorted.
NOTE CONF
The very first row would be dollar G 00 G
O L.
NOTE CONF
Dollar is something you have added from first row or
last row.
NOTE CONF
It doesn't matter.
You essentially say that because it'll be already sorted with
NOTE CONF
dollar at the start, everything after that would be the
original string G 00 G O L.
NOTE CONF
You could have done the last as well or sorry,
you could have.
NOTE CONF
because it's sorted order, sorry, not last, um, it has
to be the first because you're, you're assuming that dollar
NOTE CONF
is the lexicographically smallest.
So you have to, the original string is G O
NOTE CONF
G 00 G O L dollar dollar is something that
you have added.
NOTE CONF
The first row gives you dollar G 00 G O
L.
NOTE CONF
Always it would be the dollar followed by the original
string.
NOTE CONF
OK?
So this is a highly inefficient method of inversion.
NOTE CONF
I will let you ponder on what the uh space
and time complexity is.
NOTE CONF
It will be a cute question next week, so think
about it.
NOTE CONF
It's very easy for you to sort of follow through
this now I did kept emphasising this is a method
NOTE CONF
that you should not use.
There's a much better method to invert it.
NOTE CONF
So let's see what that is.
Are there any questions so far?
NOTE CONF
OK.
Now, so what I'm giving in this visualisation, it's not
NOTE CONF
an error in the figure, it's not a figure rendered
incorrectly, it's like a mask, somehow you're, you're peering through
NOTE CONF
something that you should not see, yeah.
So, in a way, all you have, again, we want
NOTE CONF
to invert L.
You have only these letters.
NOTE CONF
Nothing else is known, can be inverted.
Now, if you had.
NOTE CONF
Some sort of a vision into the relationship between the
letters.
NOTE CONF
So first you'll agree that all the letters in L
will have to appear in some sort of order in.
NOTE CONF
The first column of M, right, because it's fully sorted.
First column is fully sorted.
NOTE CONF
Then if they are the same, then the second column
will decide the order.
NOTE CONF
Then the third column and the 4th column and so
on.
NOTE CONF
So what I want to find is an ability to
find.
NOTE CONF
A mapping of letters in the last column to some
positions.
NOTE CONF
Where they would appear if you knew what M was,
so you don't ever have to reconstruct M, but can
NOTE CONF
you mathematically identify where.
Any L of I, the 8th character of the Burrows
NOTE CONF
wheelers transform, where would it appear?
In the first column, which position would it appear in
NOTE CONF
the first column?
If you peered through this, if you actually peered through
NOTE CONF
this, I'm giving you a visual cue, so I know
that the small l, the first L of one, last
NOTE CONF
column of 1, is that small L of Google.
Maps to position 4 in the first column of M.
NOTE CONF
Do you agree?
So I will.
NOTE CONF
I can actually um do it.
Out here So let's actually do it out here.
NOTE CONF
So this Small l appears at position 4 in the
first column, correct?
NOTE CONF
Uh, let's look at another something, um, um, another character.
This dollar appears as the first letter in F.
NOTE CONF
So what we're seeing here is some mapping.
So what we're seeing here is some mapping L maps
NOTE CONF
to 4th position.
In fact, O, this specific O, when I say this
NOTE CONF
specific O, it's because it's a cyclic rotation.
It has an order, right?
NOTE CONF
So this specific O maps to position 5 in.
Um, in the first column.
NOTE CONF
This dollar maps to The first position in this cyclic
order.
NOTE CONF
And essentially there's a 1 to 1 mapping, a distinct
bijection between.
NOTE CONF
Letters of L and letters of F.
That's what we said, that every column is a permutation
NOTE CONF
of the original.
First is a permutation of the original.
NOTE CONF
Last is a permutation of the original.
You, there is a mapping, a way to map.
NOTE CONF
Any 8th character to some position in the 1st.
Um, column of M.
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
stage, we know.
NOTE CONF
L So, no, no, I'm just saying that in general,
there is.
NOTE CONF
Now the question is how do we find out?
What's the magic formula to find that out is something
NOTE CONF
that we will see.
OK, there's only one simple formula, which is so intuitive
NOTE CONF
and obvious once you kind of see this.
But all I'm saying is there's a mapping from L
NOTE CONF
to F.
That's all I've said, right?
NOTE CONF
Now, suppose magically, so let's say that.
Um, If I have to start inverting.
NOTE CONF
A a string.
My fixed point would be.
NOTE CONF
The unique character dollar, do you?
Agree that it's always going to be the first row
NOTE CONF
of M.
dollar will start, will be the first letter of the
NOTE CONF
first column followed by the original string.
That's what we said, right?
NOTE CONF
Now, did we not say that last comes before first?
So what comes before dollar?
NOTE CONF
If I know dollar is at the 1st position in
F, we don't even know need to know what F
NOTE CONF
characters are.
We just know that dollar will always be at the
NOTE CONF
1st position of F.
What comes before dollar?
NOTE CONF
Where do I look in the Burrows-wheeler transform to find
it?
NOTE CONF
It's small l, but last of which row?
Which row number?
NOTE CONF
Rule number 1, why would last of one always be
the penultimate character in the string, because last comes before
NOTE CONF
first.
That's what we said.
NOTE CONF
And we know that FF1 has to be a dollar
because that is what made the sorted order distinct, right?
NOTE CONF
Well, dollar is the smallest possible character.
1 cent a thing, a single character which is unique,
NOTE CONF
dollar smallest, that has to be the first one.
So F of 1 would be.
NOTE CONF
Would have been dollar.
You don't even have to reconstruct F.
NOTE CONF
FF1 is dollar.
That means that if I want to find out which
NOTE CONF
character precedes it in the original string, I just have
to look at that row where what right now dollar
NOTE CONF
is in row 1 of F.
What is in the last column of in that row
NOTE CONF
L of 1, that is small l now.
If, but we don't know, the new dollar starts at
NOTE CONF
1, but we don't know.
Where the small l starts in, in F without some
NOTE CONF
thinking.
Let's pretend that if we knew where it started, OK,
NOTE CONF
let's assume that we knew where it started.
If we assume that there is a mapping that takes
NOTE CONF
you from L of I, which is I equals 1
here, to some F of position where the position, because
NOTE CONF
we're looking through the cyclic permutation matrix, the position is
4, so L of 1 maps to F of 4.
NOTE CONF
Then if I look into it's the 4th, the last
character in the 4th row, what would that give me?
NOTE CONF
So if I L maps to this, but.
In the 4th row of M.
NOTE CONF
The penul the the anti-peenultimate character, the third from the
last.
NOTE CONF
So ultimate penultimate anti-peenultimate, pre-anti-peen.
All right, all right, so not an English class, um,
NOTE CONF
so, so dollar.
Recovered L if you know where L maps to in
NOTE CONF
the first, if you look at its previous, um, its
letter in in the last L of 4 F of
NOTE CONF
4 that's a row is 4.
If you look at L of 4 you get O
NOTE CONF
so obviously O.
Precedes L.
NOTE CONF
Now if I knew, I don't even, I don't yet
know what the mapping is, but if I knew where
NOTE CONF
O appears in the first column, I'm just doing a
cheat by looking into under into the mask under the
NOTE CONF
mask, and then that is mapping to position, um, position
6.
NOTE CONF
If you look at the last letter in that row,
position 6, it's G.
NOTE CONF
so I have, um, I have.
So 1st $1 so I, I have $1.
NOTE CONF
Then, so that's the first column, last column.
Then I look at whatever letter there was in the,
NOTE CONF
in that row.
So one was the, I start with one position one.
NOTE CONF
That's always going to be $1.
By going to the last of that row, I get
NOTE CONF
L.
Now, if that map to that L map to position
NOTE CONF
4, anyone?
Uh.
NOTE CONF
OK, no questions.
So that would become it's mapping to O in that
NOTE CONF
example.
So I've reconstructed O.
NOTE CONF
If that maps to That all appears at position 5.
What's the last of that, that row, the last of
NOTE CONF
that position 5 would be, um, G, isn't it?
G?
NOTE CONF
So where does G, so now, so that would recover
G.
NOTE CONF
So where does G um appear?
So that basically uh L OG.
NOTE CONF
So that's not position 5, that's position 6, isn't it?
That's position 6.
NOTE CONF
So G Um, we don't know the mapping, how to
do it.
NOTE CONF
We're just, just saying if we knew, so GG maps
to position 2, so that G maps to position 2.
NOTE CONF
What's the last letter of that row?
That is all And this way, I can keep in,
NOTE CONF
if a mapping, if I knew the mapping, then I
can simply keep following some position I to a position
NOTE CONF
F, go to the last, recover letter, where does it
map to in F and repeat this process and times
NOTE CONF
to recover the whole thing.
Any questions?
NOTE CONF
Do you, do you want me to, we'll, we'll, yep.
No OK, so L is the first letter, do you
NOTE CONF
agree?
So, I got Lf by going from.
NOTE CONF
So I know dollar will have to be the first
letter of F.
NOTE CONF
Its preceding letter would be L.
Where does L appear?
NOTE CONF
That L should appear somewhere in the first column.
And that, if you knew the magic formula, it will
NOTE CONF
give you the, the value as 4.
Now, what is the last letter?
NOTE CONF
What would be the letter in the last column in
row 4, which is L of 4, which is O.
NOTE CONF
Now where does this O appear in the first?
Well, O appears at position 6.
NOTE CONF
Now what is the last letter um in, in that
row in row 6 that will be G.
NOTE CONF
So every time I am going from.
So this, this mapping will tell you where it starts.
NOTE CONF
When I go from L to uh from F to
L, I'm recovering the letter.
NOTE CONF
So dollar 1 maps to some position 4, position 4,
4's last in that row 4.
NOTE CONF
M would have a character, but that character is nothing
but L of 4.
NOTE CONF
That is the last column's fourth letter that would basically
be O, so I would recover O now O maps
NOTE CONF
to position 6.
The last letter in that row would be G.
NOTE CONF
That is L of 6 would be G.
So now I can basically um.
NOTE CONF
Recover G after that, and I keep doing this until
the whole thing comes through.
NOTE CONF
Yes, sir.
Brilliant question.
NOTE CONF
So asking all the right questions, we'll see that in
the next slide, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So, so the punchline is that if Any Um, if
any LI, so any LI maps to some position FPS,
NOTE CONF
then L of pas precedes LI in the original string
is what the basis of this, um, this thought process
NOTE CONF
is.
Now, and if you, if you have this mapping, you
NOTE CONF
iterate this process in times to get the entire string.
Now the question is, there are still some uncertainties.
NOTE CONF
How do you get this mapping?
And what happens if, as your friend just asked, what
NOTE CONF
happens if there are multiple letters in, if they're all
distinct letters, is that easy?
NOTE CONF
Is it all, if it's all distinct letters, it's, is
it easy?
NOTE CONF
Why?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
So how would you find that map though?
Yes.
NOTE CONF
There's a big border in which that.
Exactly, the rank order of the letters would give you,
NOTE CONF
so because the first is always sorted, if you have
um any scrambled letters in the last, it will be
NOTE CONF
in some sorted order in the first.
So if they're all distinct, then the mapping is unique,
NOTE CONF
right?
But the problem is that there are multiple, what happens
NOTE CONF
if you have multiple, obviously we have 3 O's here
and 2 G's, which the first instance of O maps
NOTE CONF
specifically to some position in the first, the second instance
of O maps to some instance of um O in
NOTE CONF
the first, and so on, right?
So we have to figure out and scramble that.
NOTE CONF
So.
Now let's look at O's here.
NOTE CONF
There are multiple instances of O's.
This is the 1st instance of O.
NOTE CONF
that's the 2nd instance of O, that's the 3rd instance
of O.
NOTE CONF
Now, so this is basically from the point of view
of the last column.
NOTE CONF
If the M were there, can you tell me in
what order do these O's appear?
NOTE CONF
In the first column, Just eyeball them So if the
call 01 02 03, let's assume first instance of or,
NOTE CONF
second instance of a uh third instance of O in
the last column.
NOTE CONF
Which order are they coming in in the first?
Is it the same order?
NOTE CONF
Is that an accident?
Why is it not an accident?
NOTE CONF
size 2.
It is not, yeah, I think Window science 2 would
NOTE CONF
be the start, the germ of your thinking, but.
So let's think about this a bit more abstractly.
NOTE CONF
So the claim is that if you have A last
column, which has, let's say, multiple Xs.
NOTE CONF
So K axis, K times you see some, some character
X.
NOTE CONF
So X appears they don't have to be in the
sorted order in the last, right?
NOTE CONF
They would be in some order because they're only sorted
order in the 1st but not in the last.
NOTE CONF
So you see the first X and then the second
X somewhere later and then 3rd X somewhere later and
NOTE CONF
so on.
So the whole idea would be that in the last
NOTE CONF
if you found.
Some X, some X, some X.
NOTE CONF
I'll, I'll just write 3 of them, because that's plenty
enough to intuit.
NOTE CONF
So in M, although you don't need it, there will
be some.
NOTE CONF
Prefix of X.
That way Some prefix of X.
NOTE CONF
Some prefix of X.
When I said prefix, I meant, I meant, what is,
NOTE CONF
I, I, I actually, I said it incorrectly.
Whatever is before the first two minus 1, OK?
NOTE CONF
Second, 2nd last.
So whatever that string is alpha 1, 1st two, second
NOTE CONF
last is alpha 2, followed by an X.
First two, the last is alpha 3.
NOTE CONF
So these are strings.
This will contain N minus 1 letters.
NOTE CONF
So If in the first column, if I want to
view where this appears in the first column, what do
NOTE CONF
I have to write, do here, first column.
Now I have, I'll just call it subscript 12, and
NOTE CONF
3 here.
So all the X's have to come.
NOTE CONF
Starting at some position.
And we'll just call it XXX.
NOTE CONF
Let's say there are only 3 X's.
They have to come.
NOTE CONF
In a block of excess, correct?
Because when you sort.
NOTE CONF
The first thing would contain the same, all the letters
in L in assorted order, so all the X's will
NOTE CONF
group together.
There'll be run of Xs.
NOTE CONF
Now what would happen to, um, so what, why, what
order would they come?
NOTE CONF
My, my claim is it will come in this order.
The question is why.
NOTE CONF
Why would it come in that order?
Can anyone tell me what happens?
NOTE CONF
So Do you see if I cyclically rotate it, this
would be X1, followed by alpha 1.
NOTE CONF
X2 followed by alpha 2.
X23 followed by alpha 3.
NOTE CONF
Do you all agree?
Good cyclic rotation.
NOTE CONF
But we also, we said that this order, you saw
these letters because This is a precedence operator.
NOTE CONF
Alpha 1 precedes alpha 2, alpha 2 precedes alpha 3.
When these characters are the same, the precedence, has to
NOTE CONF
be maintained, isn't it?
You get the same precedents as you saw the precedents
NOTE CONF
when you saw X as the last letter following alphas.
OK, so.
NOTE CONF
What you then have to do is, if.
I have, OK, now, now let's do the mapping.
NOTE CONF
This is easy.
This is not, so now I said that if I
NOTE CONF
want to look for any letter X, I know that
it has to start in the block of X's.
NOTE CONF
So if I find a way of having a formula
to know where each distinct letter starts, each distinct letter
NOTE CONF
in L, in the last column, if I know where
it starts.
NOTE CONF
I have narrowed it to the, to a start point,
OK, some position.
NOTE CONF
Now I need to know if, if my eye was
here, if I want to find the 2nd X, the
NOTE CONF
2nd.
X in this block, I have to count.
NOTE CONF
One more to add 1 to the start point.
If it's the 3rd X, I have to count step
NOTE CONF
2, add 2 to the start point.
Do you understand that?
NOTE CONF
Or in other words, If I write the formula now.
Um, it's unfortunate.
NOTE CONF
I took out the wrong one.
Let's take that.
NOTE CONF
Alpha 1 Alpha 2 alpha 3.
If I say position equals rank of some character L
NOTE CONF
of I.
And number of occurrences of that character.
NOTE CONF
L I In the range, maybe.
Maybe a bigger, this needs, this is an important formula.
NOTE CONF
I'll write it again.
pause equals rank.
NOTE CONF
Of some character LFI.
Plus Number of occurrences of the character L of I.
NOTE CONF
In the range.
I'll use L of 12 I exclusive.
NOTE CONF
OK.
So this is exclusive implies that you don't Include count
NOTE CONF
the character at I.
OK, so if Now let's take a look out here.
NOTE CONF
What is the, if I say, what is, if I
saw LF I was X, what is the rank of
NOTE CONF
X will tell you if I find a data structure
that computes where the block of Xs starts, then I
NOTE CONF
go to that point.
I go to the start point.
NOTE CONF
Then I'm saying, how many times have I seen.
And x from 1 to i exclusive, that means that
NOTE CONF
1 to i minus 1 inclusive.
So before this, how many times have I, how many
NOTE CONF
I's, uh, how many X's have I seen?
In this case, in this case, 1, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
In this example.
If it is 1, so that means that from here,
NOTE CONF
the second X would be the start point rank.
This rank of X would get you there, plus number
NOTE CONF
of occurrences is 1, so that I'll go here, that
would be my 2nd.
NOTE CONF
Now if I were doing the same logic.
On I equals the first occurrence, let's say, the rank
NOTE CONF
of L of I will tell me where it started,
number of occurrences of that character, this X, from 1
NOTE CONF
to I exclusive, before I, I've seen none, so that
would be rank plus 0, that would be that character.
NOTE CONF
Now, I will bring up the formula.
So the LF mapping can be done in In this
NOTE CONF
formula which says rank of a character X number of
occurrences LF I is the character, OK?
NOTE CONF
The num rank of some character times plus number of
occurrences of that character in the range 1 to I
NOTE CONF
exclusive.
Any questions about this?
NOTE CONF
Any questions?
This is actually a very easy formula if you just
NOTE CONF
twist your head a bit.
Yes, um, just clarifying the number of occurrences, uh, so
NOTE CONF
that's the amount of times you see alibi before that
current position, yeah, that's exactly what it is, and we'll
NOTE CONF
do an example straight, straight away, so.
So let's actually do an example.
NOTE CONF
I think once I do an example, it becomes very
clear.
NOTE CONF
So what was the um examples we'll, we'll hope to
use this formula.
NOTE CONF
rang off this thing and Number of occurrences.
Now, by the way, is can we compute the rank?
NOTE CONF
We'll use an example.
So what would be um What what would be the
NOTE CONF
um examples BWT?
Was it, what was the BWT of uh Google?
NOTE CONF
Can someone spell it out?
Dola G O.
NOTE CONF
No, that would be the first.
That's, that won't, that'd be the first row.
NOTE CONF
I'm talking about the letters in the last.
Is that correct?
NOTE CONF
OK, that's the BWT.
Now I want to invert this.
NOTE CONF
Now, let's actually invert this.
Now, first thing I want to compute, before anything, I
NOTE CONF
want to compute rank data structure.
Can I compute the rank data structure where each distinct
NOTE CONF
letter starts?
So the letters we have is dollar G in sorted
NOTE CONF
order L O.
So there'll be some start point of dollar, some start
NOTE CONF
point of G, some start point of L, some start
point of O in the first, you don't know what
NOTE CONF
the 1st is, but if you knew what the 1st
is, so I'll just bring up the slide, so that
NOTE CONF
you're tracking.
So, So if I in fact if I get Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So what, this is the matrix that you have.
Forget about what's on the slide.
NOTE CONF
Just look at that matrix.
So how do I compute the rank data structure from
NOTE CONF
just this information?
Yep, you have to sort it.
NOTE CONF
You could sort it, but I'll, I will say that
it's an overkill to sort it.
NOTE CONF
Well, it's, it is a sort in that sense, but
it's basically counting, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
It's more than sorting, it's counting.
So let's actually count first.
NOTE CONF
Let's count before we form the data structure.
The counts are, so how many, so if I, if
NOTE CONF
I go from L1 to LN, the last first letter
to last letter, when I'm here, I saw L um
NOTE CONF
once.
I saw 0 once, I saw dollar once.
NOTE CONF
I saw 0 again, so that becomes 2.
I saw O again, that becomes 3.
NOTE CONF
I saw G once.
I saw G here twice.
NOTE CONF
So now to get the rank.
I start with 1.
NOTE CONF
Obviously, $1 will have to start at 1 because they're
unique.
NOTE CONF
1 + 1 gives me 22 + 2 gives me
44 + 1 gives me 5.
NOTE CONF
Yeah So if you look Dollar, the block of starting
in dollars, the rank of dollar is 1.
NOTE CONF
The rank of G, it's there are 2 G's, but
it starts at position 2.
NOTE CONF
I There are, there's a single L, it starts at
4, and there are 3 O's, and that block starts
NOTE CONF
at 5.
So essentially you get rank is telling you where those
NOTE CONF
letters start.
Is that clear, everyone?
NOTE CONF
Now, let's forget about what you have.
So let's use.
NOTE CONF
This information So I'll write this 1245.
And that formula.
NOTE CONF
To now invert it.
So when I'm, so let me I'll use a different
NOTE CONF
colour.
So when you start the algorithm, you have already inverted
NOTE CONF
dollar because you know that last one you're doing inversion
backwards, so dollar has been inverted, then.
NOTE CONF
You look at, so the dollar would have been.
Pause equals 1.
NOTE CONF
The last letter, so L of that pass will give,
will, will recover.
NOTE CONF
The letter before it, that is a small l, so
Burrows wheelers, whatever the character you have in that row
NOTE CONF
in the burrow in that position equals 1.
So now we want to find where does this L
NOTE CONF
map to in.
Um, in F.
NOTE CONF
So that's F, that's L.
So where does this L map to in F?
NOTE CONF
So rank of, you have to say rank of L.
So what is the rank of L4?
NOTE CONF
So my positions right now here I equals 1.
So rank of L of I, the rank of L
NOTE CONF
would be 4.
Number of occurrences of LOI, which is small l, in
NOTE CONF
the range, 1.
To one exclusive 1 to 1 exclusive starting at one
NOTE CONF
but not.
Ending before 1, so 1 to 0, that's null range,
NOTE CONF
which means that number of occurrences is 0, so that
would be 4.
NOTE CONF
So now, 1234567.
I think so, um.
NOTE CONF
So I know that this L, by using this, the
pause is now at position 4.
NOTE CONF
Now what is the letter before L?
Look at the last L of that position that that
NOTE CONF
would be O.
so I would recover O.
NOTE CONF
Now I is pointing to 4.
I have to say, where does this O appear in
NOTE CONF
the first?
Now let's do, do the same drill.
NOTE CONF
What is the rank of O?
5.
NOTE CONF
What is the number of occurrences of O coming from
uh from 1 to 1 exclusive, so 1 to 3,
NOTE CONF
really.
So there'll be 1, so 5 + 1 is 6.
NOTE CONF
So this O maps to position, at position 6.
So that will be pause.
NOTE CONF
Now, what comes before O?
Look at the last one, that's G.
NOTE CONF
So now I would be pointing to 6.
Where does this G appear in the first?
NOTE CONF
Let's do it.
It's worth an exercise.
NOTE CONF
Rank of G is 2.
Number of occurrences of G from 1 to I exclusive.
NOTE CONF
How many times have I seen a G before 00
times.
NOTE CONF
So that has to map to um this, this position,
position 2 to 2 + 0 is 2.
NOTE CONF
So that would be that position.
What comes before that?
NOTE CONF
Is oh, where does this start?
Well, what's the rank of O?
NOTE CONF
Rank of O is 5.
Number of occurrences of O from 1 to, so I
NOTE CONF
equals 2 here now, from 1 to I exclusive is
0.
NOTE CONF
So 5 + 0 is 5.
So that maps to uh O here.
NOTE CONF
What comes before that is, oh.
Where does this O appear in the 1st?
NOTE CONF
Well, rank of O is 5.
Number of occurrences, so actually, Um, we will be here
NOTE CONF
now.
I equals 5.
NOTE CONF
Num rank of O equals 5.
Number of occurrences of O from 1 to that position
NOTE CONF
exclusive is 2.
So 5 + 2 equals 7.
NOTE CONF
So that comes to that position.
The one before that is G.
NOTE CONF
And once you get to recovered, um, And characters you
can stop.
NOTE CONF
If you did not stop, what would happen?
You would actually, you would basically be circling around a
NOTE CONF
circle.
OK.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
So because uh let's do one round of it and
NOTE CONF
we'll, we'll, we'll see that if you go around, we'll
end up getting to dollar, right?
NOTE CONF
If you circle around.
So if we, um we were at 7, so recovered
NOTE CONF
G, where does this G appear?
Well, G rank of G is 2.
NOTE CONF
Number of occurrences of G from 1 to this position
exclusive is 1, which would be 3, isn't it?
NOTE CONF
So with 3, that would be that position.
What's before, before that is a dollar.
NOTE CONF
So you circle back over and over again.
Isn't that magical, OK, if you think about it.
NOTE CONF
Now, I want you to spend some time to figure
out If you could preprocess the occurrences to make sure
NOTE CONF
that with that extra space you could make this run
in time, linear time with some extra space, think about
NOTE CONF
it, OK?
I, I think you still have time to think about
NOTE CONF
it, but it is, it is if you did not
have, if you are implementing.
NOTE CONF
An occurrence, number of occurrences.
What's the time complexity to compute rank?
NOTE CONF
Oh, you said?
Correct.
NOTE CONF
So Yes, that's the table that you'll be filling, but
you have to pass through, pass, count, do a counting
NOTE CONF
over L.
So, so you would have to, you have to do
NOTE CONF
one pass of L to be able to find out
number of times each character appears to be able to
NOTE CONF
fill a table of size sigma in the worst case,
sigma would be um the alphabet size, yeah.
NOTE CONF
But now if you implemented a number of occurrences as
a function, then it would basically be um.
NOTE CONF
If you, if you implemented that the function, then number
of occurrences would be each, uh, worst case of this
NOTE CONF
would be ON, right?
Every, every time you're doing number of occurrences, it's ON
NOTE CONF
you're doing this and times inversions that will be N
squared.
NOTE CONF
But can you create a trade-off some space so that
that requires no space if you're just doing it as
NOTE CONF
a function.
But if you are, if you can assign some space,
NOTE CONF
pre-process the data structure, can you do it in ON
time?
NOTE CONF
The same thing is something that you have to think
about.
NOTE CONF
It's easy to think about it.
Whatever I've been done on the board, I have done
NOTE CONF
here.
So all you have here is basically that mechanics of
NOTE CONF
going back and forth.
Here is just a visual.
NOTE CONF
What you have here on the slide is essentially the
mapping, um.
NOTE CONF
I did that with only L, which is what your
programme has to do.
NOTE CONF
This will give you a context of the matrix.
So we essentially, When you do this recovery, you just
NOTE CONF
have to use that formula.
Any questions here?
NOTE CONF
Come on.
Um, it, it is a fascinating, um, bijection between LNF
NOTE CONF
and you recovered it.
Now, I must say that If you're, how many of
NOTE CONF
you use BZI, BZ2 as a file, um, So you've
done GZip, that's the Lempelzip compression, that's the Glue version
NOTE CONF
of PKZip.
Um, that's the GZIP, that's Lempel 77.
NOTE CONF
We'll learn that in week five.
I'm telling, I'm promising you that we're learning one real-world
NOTE CONF
algorithm each week, which is kind of cool, yeah, and
this is easy.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's a, for, for people who have a
Linux machine or a Unix machine back home, just explore
NOTE CONF
if you say, if you have, just type in BZ
and tab, see if you can see a command.
NOTE CONF
Do a, read the man page on BZI 2.
It is basically what it's trying to do is Because
NOTE CONF
this column, so if you can have a text, a
file, if you construct the BWT of the file, because
NOTE CONF
this column is close to a fully sorted column.
There's a lot of compression properties that it has, so
NOTE CONF
you can use something like a run length encoding.
If you don't understand that, that's fine.
NOTE CONF
You can do something like a run length encoding to
be able to um compress with very simple compression schemes.
NOTE CONF
You can compress this files which will beat most standard
Lempel Ziv variants.
NOTE CONF
OK.
There are many variants of LempelZiv, but if you can
NOTE CONF
see with the, if you run a take a file,
a fairly big file, uh, whatever, um.
NOTE CONF
Um, text, the text that you have, run it through
zip and run it through BZI 2, you will see
NOTE CONF
that the file size is, uh, smaller.
It's much more efficient in compression.
NOTE CONF
So that was the um so if you, if you,
the whole idea is that you have a file, get
NOTE CONF
its BWT compress it uncompress the BWT invert it.
So that's the so compressor will take the file, construct
NOTE CONF
the BWT.
Press it.
NOTE CONF
The decompressor, when you say the the unzip part of
it will basically take the the compressed form uncompressed into
NOTE CONF
a BWT and invert it back to the original and
you get the original file back.
NOTE CONF
That's cool, yeah, so that's basically already very cool now,
but this should blow your minds.
NOTE CONF
Away, surely that's mine.
Um.
NOTE CONF
So we want to use, now I'm going to claim
that we're going to use this BWT as a search
NOTE CONF
index.
Again, same formula, in slightly different form.
NOTE CONF
I will go through the mechanics, the drill, and then
we will spend some time reflecting of why that formula
NOTE CONF
that we have is correct.
Just as the LF mapping formula, we've shown that it's
NOTE CONF
correct.
This one, I will first introduce the formula, do the
NOTE CONF
mechanics, crank turning, and then we'll see if we understand
why that works.
NOTE CONF
OK, the idea would be that if you have a
text.
NOTE CONF
You pre-process the text into its BWT.
If you have a pattern, all you're doing is searching
NOTE CONF
on the pattern.
In fact, Because you have constructed the text using its
NOTE CONF
suffix array, you have, you have the suffix array with
it so that at the end of it, when you
NOTE CONF
search for a pattern, you know exactly where by looking
at the suffix array, where the patterns appear, if at
NOTE CONF
all they do.
OK, that's what we're going to do now.
NOTE CONF
This is slightly different from what we have done in
the past two weeks.
NOTE CONF
The past two weeks, we sort of preprocessed the pattern.
And searched the text.
NOTE CONF
Now we sort of flip the Uh, the cart around
and we're just preprocessing the text and then searching the
NOTE CONF
pattern.
Does that make sense to you?
NOTE CONF
Now, in fact, it is much more logical to preprocess
the text and search for the pattern because most of
NOTE CONF
the search indexes are changed less frequently.
Yeah, so usually the queries change, the texts don't change
NOTE CONF
as as much.
So what people, what's, so let's say that you have
NOTE CONF
last 10 years of.
The Age or The Age, the newspaper, then, uh sorry,
NOTE CONF
I have to speak strine.
Um, if you had the 10 years of, uh, of,
NOTE CONF
of the Age, then.
Um, you kind of can, that won't change.
NOTE CONF
That's basically the last 10 years of the only the
new ones will change.
NOTE CONF
So you could basically be searching in the old indexes
in some static way where you're pre-processed the text for
NOTE CONF
because it's static, it won't change, and then you only
the patterns keep changing and so you would want to
NOTE CONF
use the pre-processing on the text to search for a
pattern, and that's far more efficient and this one.
NOTE CONF
If you have pre-processed the text, preprocessing the text is,
I already told you, if you have a text, text
NOTE CONF
is nothing but a can be thought of as a
long string, right?
NOTE CONF
So you can preprocess the text in order and time
if you knew the algorithms to do it, you will
NOTE CONF
know one algorithm to one way to do it by
end of next week to compute the suffix array.
NOTE CONF
And hence the BWT.
So you do one time ON effort over the text,
NOTE CONF
and every time you get a pattern you're spending OM
effort to search for where that appears in the text.
NOTE CONF
Does that make sense?
That is a set up.
NOTE CONF
So what I'll then do is.
So what we're going to do is Use the same
NOTE CONF
rank and number of occurrences.
I'll first tell you the mechanics.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to, in the first round, don't understand
the why the formulas work.
NOTE CONF
Take them that it works, and then we'll get some
insights.
NOTE CONF
We'll do an example.
So the idea would be, so this is what you
NOTE CONF
have.
So this is what the, the Burrowsvias column is what
NOTE CONF
you have.
That's your index.
NOTE CONF
So You have two pointers.
When you start the algorithm, the pointers are pointing to
NOTE CONF
the full range of the BWT.
So before you started, you have to search the BWT,
NOTE CONF
set the pointers to the first letter and the last
letter of the BWT.
NOTE CONF
LF1 is start point, LF N would be the end
point.
NOTE CONF
And then it is saying, search.
So if you have a pattern.
NOTE CONF
pattern of one.
Letter to, OK, let's actually write it this way.
NOTE CONF
I turn 123, all the way to M.
So you're searching the pattern backwards, much like inverting the
NOTE CONF
string backwards, you're searching the pattern backwards.
Does that make sense?
NOTE CONF
So you're searching for the nth letter of the pattern
first, then M minus 1, then M minus 2, and
NOTE CONF
then M minus 3 all the way to the start
of the pattern.
NOTE CONF
Now, while you're searching, let's say that you have searched
initially for the character X at position M.
NOTE CONF
You, after the search using those formulas, you're updating.
The start and end points to some continuous range.
NOTE CONF
OK.
And why the update is correct, we will, we will
NOTE CONF
see in a bit.
But let's do the mechanics.
NOTE CONF
So what's the formula to update start point?
So you start with the Original range, first start point
NOTE CONF
end point.
And you say that, well, apply first would be look
NOTE CONF
for the last character, so rank of X plus number
of occurrences of X from 1 to I exclusive, that
NOTE CONF
looks very much like the LF mapping formula, isn't it?
In fact, it is the LF LF mapping formula.
NOTE CONF
And then A slight Subtle variation for the endpoint.
It's saying rank of x plus number of occurrences of
NOTE CONF
x from 1 to endpoint inclusive this time.
So endpoint is inclusive, and then you corrected it for
NOTE CONF
-1, OK?
We will worry about why that's the case later on.
NOTE CONF
First, we'll do the mechanics and convince ourselves to know
why it works, right?
NOTE CONF
So let's actually.
Go, uh, look at the slides here.
NOTE CONF
So, so that's the formula.
It's good if you write it down or at least,
NOTE CONF
uh, so that if I go to the next slide,
I don't know if I have the formulas on the
NOTE CONF
example slides that I'm going to flip over, but rank
plus number of occurrences of that, of the thing that
NOTE CONF
you're searching backwards from 1 to start point exclusive.
And the endpoint would be number of occurrences of that
NOTE CONF
character 12 end point inclusive minus 1, OK.
Now, let's look at the simple example, we'll do the
NOTE CONF
example and then we'll get some insights.
So if that formula were right of updates, let's see
NOTE CONF
what those formulas are giving us.
So we have the text, we have the pattern, small
NOTE CONF
pattern.
Now, what do we have?
NOTE CONF
Really, all we have is the last column.
All the remaining stuff, well, we have the last column
NOTE CONF
and the suffix array, let's say, OK, all you have
is the last column and the suffix array, because you
NOTE CONF
constructed the last column from the suffix array.
That's the, that's the reason why you have the suffix
NOTE CONF
array all the time when you, when you have this.
So the idea would be that when you're searching for
NOTE CONF
this pattern GO.
You're searching backwards, you agree that first you have to
NOTE CONF
search for the last letter, which is O.
Now, if I apply.
NOTE CONF
Um, that formula to update the range.
The range is starting at 1 and ending at 7
NOTE CONF
in this case, I have to update this range.
So let's see what happens when I search for O
NOTE CONF
using those formula.
So start, so rank of O, what was rank of
NOTE CONF
O?
We had this, uh, can somebody tell me, look at
NOTE CONF
the slide that has rank dollar GLO I think it
was 1245, I think from memory, is that what it
NOTE CONF
was?
Yeah, so rank of.
NOTE CONF
So first letter is O, you're searching for O.
So what is the rank of O is 5.
NOTE CONF
Number of occurrences of O from 1 to start point
exclusive, what would that be?
NOTE CONF
I'm just applying the formula, update formula.
1 to 1 exclusive.
NOTE CONF
Is 0.
The number of occurrences is 0.
NOTE CONF
So how many times have I seen an 0 before
this start point position?
NOTE CONF
Well, there's no before, so.
Updated Updated start point would be 5 + 0 will
NOTE CONF
be pointing to 5.
OK.
NOTE CONF
So I will say that.
It would be pointing to 5.
NOTE CONF
The updated EP would be pointing to 5.
Now, what is the updated endpoint?
NOTE CONF
Rank of O.
Rank of O is 5.
NOTE CONF
Number of occurrences of O from 1 to end point
inclusive.
NOTE CONF
How many times have I seen an O in that
range?
NOTE CONF
3 times minus 1.
So 5 + 3 minus 1 is 5 + 2,
NOTE CONF
which is 7.
So, when I do the updates, if I apply this,
NOTE CONF
I'm going to get, in fact, I didn't realise I
actually worked it out the slide.
NOTE CONF
But anyway, uh, 5 + 0 and 5 + 3
minus 1, and that would give me a range which
NOTE CONF
is start point end point.
Just if you had the M matrix, do you see
NOTE CONF
that it is actually pointing to the whole block of
O's?
NOTE CONF
In as it appears in the first column.
OK, so you have searched for an O, that range.
NOTE CONF
Will contain the, the string that you have searched for.
So you only search for O now.
NOTE CONF
Now, next, we will have to search for the next
letter G.
NOTE CONF
OK?
Now, G, What is the rank of G?
NOTE CONF
We'll do it, we'll, I think the arithmetic will be
in the next slide, but what's the rank of G?
NOTE CONF
What's the rank of G?
2, number of occurrences of G from 1 to start
NOTE CONF
point exclusive.
How many times have I seen G before the start
NOTE CONF
point?
0.
NOTE CONF
So start point gets updated to 2.
And then end point it's saying rank of G rank
NOTE CONF
of G is 2 again, number of occurrences of G
from 1 to end point inclusive minus 1.
NOTE CONF
How many times have I seen G in the range
1 to this end point inclusive twice.
NOTE CONF
So basically.
Rank was 2, number of occurrences was 2 minus 1.
NOTE CONF
So 2 + 2 minus 1 is 3.
So if I updated end point to 3, so start
NOTE CONF
point was 2, end point was 3, so start point
start point was updated to 2, end point was updated
NOTE CONF
to 3, then.
That range now will by bizarre magic seems to be
NOTE CONF
pointing to GO in the first two columns.
And if let's assume that we have to look for
NOTE CONF
one more letter, let's say we look for O.
So let's say the pattern was OGO, so we already
NOTE CONF
searched for GO, that's where the start point end points
were.
NOTE CONF
Let's see if it, if it continues.
So let's say OGO.
NOTE CONF
Rank of O, the last, the third letter from the
last was O, if I've introduced that letter.
NOTE CONF
So we are searching for.
OGO we have already done this.
NOTE CONF
We have to now do that letter.
Rank of O is 5.
NOTE CONF
Number of occurrences of O from 1 to that position
exclusive is 0.
NOTE CONF
So 5 plus 0 is 5.
So start point gets updated to 5, then end point
NOTE CONF
would be.
Uh gets updated to what rank of O which is
NOTE CONF
5 plus number of occurrences of O from 1 to
endpoint inclusive minus 1.
NOTE CONF
So 5 + 1 minus 1, which is 5.
So both start point and point will point to position
NOTE CONF
5.
So that would be that position.
NOTE CONF
Look at.
The first three letters will be OGO.
NOTE CONF
As you are searching, these formulas will essentially guide you
to a range which will narrow down to an interval
NOTE CONF
where those characters have to appear in the first few
first sets of columns based on the length of the
NOTE CONF
string that you've searched your search from the last.
The 2nd last, and 3rd last, if you go all
NOTE CONF
the way to M searches, the first M columns will
contain the pattern.
NOTE CONF
The range would point to that point to that, uh,
um, uh, to, to that pattern that you've searched for.
NOTE CONF
I'll just do one example, a counter example.
What happens when while searching a pattern doesn't exist in,
NOTE CONF
in the, in the original thing?
It's quite common to search for patterns that don't exist.
NOTE CONF
So let's actually search for.
LG, so instead of OGO let's search for LGO.
NOTE CONF
What happens if I search for LGO?
So this is the range that you already have.
NOTE CONF
So instead of OGO I'm searching for the new character
is L, not O.
NOTE CONF
So rank of L would be 4, number of occurrences
of L before this position is 14 plus 1 is
NOTE CONF
5.
So start point is pointing to 5, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Now, end point, let's see what happens.
Rank of L would be 4.
NOTE CONF
Number of occurrences of L from 1 to that position
inclusive minus 1, which is 1.
NOTE CONF
So 4 + 1 minus 1 is 4.
So start point is 5, end point is 4.
NOTE CONF
Now, that actually gives you a very cool insight that
if you want to know how many times a pattern
NOTE CONF
appears, you do endpoint minus start point plus 1.
So, if you do, start point is 5, endpoint is
NOTE CONF
4, I'll write it down, start point.
Start point is 5, endpoint is 4.
NOTE CONF
End point minus start point plus 1 will be a
number of occurrences.
NOTE CONF
4 minus 5 + 1 is 0.
So if right now in the, on the slide you're
NOTE CONF
currently seeing start point equals 2, end point equals 3,
end point minus start point plus 1, will give you
NOTE CONF
a number of occurrences of a pattern that you're seeing.
Now, can that's, so that's basically the algorithm.
NOTE CONF
So I want you to think why this thing works
and answer that question.
NOTE CONF
No, we don't need the matrix because I'll tell you,
good question.
NOTE CONF
So remember I already said that all you had was
L.
NOTE CONF
You had the rank matrix, uh, sorry, rank array computed
from L.
NOTE CONF
And let's assume that you have some data structure for
a number of occurrences.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise you're, you're running the number of occurrences on L,
so it doesn't require anything else other than L.
NOTE CONF
So both rank number of occurrences is what is needed
to update started end points.
NOTE CONF
Now, let's say that you searched for GO, you stopped
here.
NOTE CONF
How do you know where it appears in the text?
I that's the question, right?
NOTE CONF
So, OK, look at the suffix array in that range.
You have a suffix array because you constructed L.
NOTE CONF
What does a suffix array tell you?
That this starts at 4, this starts at 1.
NOTE CONF
That means that GO starts at position 4 and position
1.
NOTE CONF
So you kind of have the multiplicity from the arithmetic
of start and end point.
NOTE CONF
Multiplicity implies that how many times does a pattern appears
can be answered by just start and end point.
NOTE CONF
Where does it appear in the original text can be
found out by looking at the values.
NOTE CONF
In that range, so let's say here, uh, in the
previous example, the start point was 5 and end point
NOTE CONF
was 7.
You have to just look at the suffix array to
NOTE CONF
know that O appears at position 35, and 2 in
the original text.
NOTE CONF
So 35, and 2 is so it won't be in
an order that you would expect it to find.
NOTE CONF
It's in the order that is the best for it
to find based on the.
NOTE CONF
LF relationship um of this matrix.
So this you never ever construct this matrix, this matrix
NOTE CONF
is only for your illustration, yeah?
Yes, could end minus point give less than 1, 5
NOTE CONF
can never.
Well, it can never.
NOTE CONF
So that the reason is that um when well it
it it won't, it won't unless if, if it gives
NOTE CONF
you any any value less than that, then it means
that you have computed the rank incorrectly and number of
NOTE CONF
occurrences incorrectly.
Now, what's remaining is um.
NOTE CONF
Where, uh, why is this formula correct?
OK, maybe we have a few tens of minutes.
NOTE CONF
So really what we're doing is practically inspired by inversion,
OK.
NOTE CONF
The formula is exactly identical, right?
So, if you, if I replaced, at least for the
NOTE CONF
start point, if I replace the start point by I,
L of I, it would be rank of LF I
NOTE CONF
plus number of occurrences of LF I from 1 to
I exclusive.
NOTE CONF
Now, really, what it's doing is the following.
Does anyone want to think about it, why it works?
NOTE CONF
Why this should work, this magic.
OK, so.
NOTE CONF
In general When you start the algorithm, so let's say,
This should actually give you a context of why it
NOTE CONF
should work.
We can prove that.
NOTE CONF
So let's say you're searching for the last letter X.
What you're trying to do is find out what would
NOTE CONF
be the position of X.
In the starting position of X in the first column,
NOTE CONF
and what would be The ending position of X in
the first column, that's what LF mapping was doing, right?
NOTE CONF
for in general LF mapping was mapping some character of
of L to to the first the position in the
NOTE CONF
first column.
So now what we're doing here is use any arbitrary
NOTE CONF
character X and say where does X start and where
does it end, right?
NOTE CONF
So we have an initial range set to 1 and
N.
NOTE CONF
Let's say that there was some X here and some
X there and some X there.
NOTE CONF
So Although the start and end points are pointing to
the full range, there is an actual position I where
NOTE CONF
X starts, and an actual position J where X.
Is last found or actual uh I'll say that again
NOTE CONF
the actual position X where X is observed for the
first time and actual position of of X where X
NOTE CONF
is observed uh the last time.
If X doesn't exist, then you would never see, you
NOTE CONF
would never ever see that character in that range, right?
OK, and then that's when you end up getting a
NOTE CONF
scenario where.
End point would be less than start point, OK, because
NOTE CONF
number of occurrences for both cases would be 0, so
it's rank in one case it's rank plus number of
NOTE CONF
occurrences exclusive.
Another case rank plus number of uh occurrences inclusive minus
NOTE CONF
1.
The fact that you're doing a -1, you always get
NOTE CONF
a -1.
That's the only reason why you, you would get that.
NOTE CONF
So, but in general if there are.
Zero or more X's, they'll, they potentially the first time
NOTE CONF
you will see an X and last time you see
an X.
NOTE CONF
What you really want to know is where does this
map do and where does this map do.
NOTE CONF
That is, so if you were to write the formula,
you would have to say rank of.
NOTE CONF
L of I.
Plus number of occurrences of LFI.
NOTE CONF
In the range 1 to I exclusive, that was what
you should have written.
NOTE CONF
OK.
For that would be the start point uh that would
NOTE CONF
be where it starts in the first column, OK?
The actual start point.
NOTE CONF
Now, if, if you want to know where it ends,
you want to say rank of L of J plus
NOTE CONF
number of occurrences of LJ from 1 to J exclusive.
So both are exclusive.
NOTE CONF
That is what you would have to write, if you
were searching it, if you knew where it actually started
NOTE CONF
and where you actually ended.
But by ensuring that you're, you're keeping these pointers start
NOTE CONF
point end point.
If this is the, tell me one thing, if this
NOTE CONF
is the first, if I is the first ever observed
X, would you have observed X before?
NOTE CONF
So if you evaluate and replace this by SP.
Would you still get the same formula?
NOTE CONF
Because number of occurrences, whether exclusive of I or exclusive
of SP, which is less than I, less than or
NOTE CONF
equal to I, would be the same.
It'll actually evaluate the same value.
NOTE CONF
So, so updated will include, so this is pattern.
So let's say a pattern of some I.
NOTE CONF
This will be some pattern of some I.
So you're searching for a character in the pattern, which
NOTE CONF
is in this case, X, and you would update it
correctly using that formula.
NOTE CONF
Now, Spend some time thinking about it.
If you don't, it's not fully clear, we'll come to
NOTE CONF
the help desk.
We'll go through it a few times, and then you
NOTE CONF
will say, well, that was obvious.
It's one of those things where it is obvious once
NOTE CONF
you've done it.
So, but what I'm trying to get at is instead
NOTE CONF
of actually finding X's in this range, all I can
use is this SP itself because number of occurrences of
NOTE CONF
1 to I.
Exclusive of I is same as number of occurrences of
NOTE CONF
1 to SP exclusive of SP because they're nothing before
that.
NOTE CONF
Now The EP is slightly tricky, yeah.
Now, let's look at what happens if J, that endpoint
NOTE CONF
is actually at some position J.
And if you used EP what would happen?
NOTE CONF
So EP would be greater than equal to J in
that range.
NOTE CONF
The range is basically being narrowed down in some, some,
some form.
NOTE CONF
So if you do rank off some pattern, Number of
occurrences of that pattern uh pattern of the character in
NOTE CONF
the pattern from 1 to.
EP exclusive.
NOTE CONF
Let's say you use the exclusive formula, do you see
that you'll be counting J?
NOTE CONF
Because EP can be potentially greater than J, exclusive implies
that it's exclusive of EP, but inclusive of J because
NOTE CONF
J is less, if J is less than EP, you
would in fact be counting that.
NOTE CONF
What you want is to not count it, so which
means that I will include it and subtract one.
NOTE CONF
So essentially what you're doing is, instead of getting 1
to J exclusive, I'm doing 1 to EP inclusive and
NOTE CONF
excluding the last occurrences occurrence of J.
That's what I'm, I've done, and that narrows down, so
NOTE CONF
which means that I have a mapping of the first
and the last.
NOTE CONF
Uh, uh, occurrence of any character, um, in the first
column, and that's what happened here when I updated it
NOTE CONF
when I went from, when I went from that scenario
and updated it.
NOTE CONF
It got This was the first occurrence of the first
character O, the last occurrence of first character O.
NOTE CONF
Then.
Now I have this range.
NOTE CONF
What precedes this range?
It's the characters in the last column, right?
NOTE CONF
So if I have already searched what in the text,
what precedes all.
NOTE CONF
What comes before O?
It'll only be characters O, G, and G, right?
NOTE CONF
Because last precedes first.
So now I want to sort of say, I want
NOTE CONF
to find out what.
Would be the first occurrence of the character I want
NOTE CONF
to search in the preceding, um, in the preceding set
of elements.
NOTE CONF
So now I'm searching for a G.
So what would be the first instance where I saw
NOTE CONF
a G because I've used one to start point and
one to end point correctly if that that formula is
NOTE CONF
clear to you, what I end up getting would be
an update.
NOTE CONF
Where the start point endpoints will narrow down to a
range where GO now appears in the first two columns,
NOTE CONF
but you don't, you're not really constructing M.
you're just using L start point and point, and all
NOTE CONF
the remaining stuff here is only for your visualisation of
what really is happening with this magical search.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, so we kind of, um, and then at, at
some point if you don't see a pattern, you don't
NOTE CONF
have to keep searching for the remaining thing.
So as you're searching, if you don't find a a
NOTE CONF
character, you can, that that means that end point is
1 less than the start point you stop the algorithm
NOTE CONF
and say zero occurrences.
Pretty clever algorithm this.
NOTE CONF
So if you did this.
Then What we have right now is Two variations of
NOTE CONF
search that we have seen, two broad classes of search
that we have seen.
NOTE CONF
First search was preprocessing the pattern and searching the text.
So every time a pattern changes, you still have to
NOTE CONF
process the text, right?
Because that's what Boomore did.
NOTE CONF
And if you actually think about it, the pattern matching
of using Z algorithm is also pre-processing the pattern and
NOTE CONF
searching the text.
Do you know why that's the case?
NOTE CONF
Week one?
Remember pattern, dollar text, and you computed Z values.
NOTE CONF
Why is that same as preprocessing the Um, the pattern.
In fact, I'll tell you one thing, you don't need
NOTE CONF
Z value if you're doing a terminal, that the, um,
if you're using the separator dollar, the dollar means that
NOTE CONF
it's a separator.
Pattern dollar text, you don't need more than the The
NOTE CONF
values of size M, you don't even have to store
M + N + 1 Z values.
NOTE CONF
That's because all you are relying on, because the longest
pack uh match you would get would be of size
NOTE CONF
M, isn't it?
If you have a dollar, which is unique.
NOTE CONF
The longest match of any substring with the prefix has
to be of size M.
NOTE CONF
So you would never ever rely on a Z value
previously that's greater than size.
NOTE CONF
Never.
So, By when you do the Z values, you essentially
NOTE CONF
found the structure in the pattern.
You preprocess the pattern.
NOTE CONF
Once you start processing the values outside, uh, beyond the
dollar, you are essentially using what you're preprocessed in the
NOTE CONF
Z values of the pattern to talk about whether you're
getting gaining gaining some uh speed up in your computation
NOTE CONF
of Z ZI values in that later part, right?
That's preprocessing the pattern too so if.
NOTE CONF
You're doing this.
The first class is to preprocess the pattern.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and search on the text each time the pattern
comes, this kind of search is preprocessing the text.
NOTE CONF
You only compute the suffix array and the Burrows-wheeler transform
once.
NOTE CONF
So you, once you compute the, uh, Burrows-Wheeler transform, you
also have the suffix array, um, associated with it.
NOTE CONF
So you have essentially two pieces of information.
It is that last column here and that stuff that
NOTE CONF
we're showing as a suffix array.
Now, then you're, for every new pattern, you're just doing.
NOTE CONF
This backward search on the pattern and the update rules
are constant if you have the rank and number of
NOTE CONF
occurrences preprocessed because rank and number of occurrences don't have
to change with every pattern search, right?
NOTE CONF
Rank is a function of L.
Number of occurrences is a function of L.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to keep changing them, so you're pre-processed.
So when you're running the search, you have the suffix
NOTE CONF
array, you have the Burrows-Wilis transform, obviously, that you generated
from the suffix array.
NOTE CONF
You pre-processed the rank, you're pre-processed the um number of
occurrences, and then you're waiting for a query.
NOTE CONF
When a query comes, you can do the query in
OM time if M is the size of the query,
NOTE CONF
OK?
And if you have K queries, it'll be order N
NOTE CONF
preprocessing plus.
K times M.
NOTE CONF
You have a question, sir?
So Mhm.
NOTE CONF
how So the way you compresses, the fact that there'll
be a, uh, because of the fact that it is
NOTE CONF
1 before the sorted, I can write it in a
run length encoding.
NOTE CONF
So what, what you could do here, I can say
1 times L, 1 times 01 times dollar, 2 times
NOTE CONF
02 times G.
So I'm storing a tuple, a number and a character,
NOTE CONF
and that's called run-length encoding.
In fact, they use what's called a move to front
NOTE CONF
encoding.
There are a few other things that, um, but even
NOTE CONF
a simple run-length encoding will beat a Lempel Ziv.
And I, I'm not saying this as reading somewhere it's
NOTE CONF
by practise.
I've done this several times to know that, I mean,
NOTE CONF
obviously I can create adversarial text which will one performs
better than the other, but by and large, on average,
NOTE CONF
you would have B zip.
The only sort of flip side to B B Zip
NOTE CONF
is the memory pressure, so you have to store the
BWT in some form.
NOTE CONF
And there are some Ferraina and Manzini.
Uh, came up with a com searching on a compressed
NOTE CONF
version, which is kind of mind boggling.
It's called a succinct or opportunistic data structure, because you
NOTE CONF
have the search index in a compressed form, and your,
it permits searching.
NOTE CONF
So your search data structure is smaller than the data
itself, and still you can search for the data.
NOTE CONF
All right, um, sorry, how does run length encoding on
the like BWT, like how is that better than just
NOTE CONF
on the normal string?
I think I'm just confused.
NOTE CONF
Because the reason, OK, good question.
The question really is that why is run length encoding
NOTE CONF
on a BWT?
Why does it give you, why is it better than
NOTE CONF
just using a run length encoding on a normal string?
The fact that whenever you have, um, let's say that
NOTE CONF
you have a uh a long uh text, original text,
there's always some patterns, let's say that I follows P
NOTE CONF
several times and I follows Q several times, right?
Um, so whenever you see IP, if P is in
NOTE CONF
the first column, the last column will be I.
So every time the block of Ps comes, the last
NOTE CONF
the last column will have the block of I's, and
because it, it is, so how do you reason this
NOTE CONF
intuitively?
It's quite simple.
NOTE CONF
Think of the first column to be, so if you
think of a cylinder with columns around the cylinder, first
NOTE CONF
column is sorted.
And there's a diffusion of entropy around that column.
NOTE CONF
So entropy is the state of disorderedness of that column.
That entropy is diffusing on both sides, like a normally
NOTE CONF
distributed thing, where it kind of the entropy becomes worse
and worse as your distance from the sorted column goes.
NOTE CONF
Now, one great question one would ask is, clearly, if
you can compress the last column, you could compress the
NOTE CONF
second column.
Your second column is 1 away from the first, but
NOTE CONF
you cannot do the the mapping from the 2nd to
1st as you would do from the last to 1st.
NOTE CONF
That LF mapping is the magic.
Now, the reason why L is such a special column,
NOTE CONF
that that inversion of L to F, that mapping is
possible for, for the last column, but not any other
NOTE CONF
column, OK.
There are many questions like this, it's a very, very
NOTE CONF
cute data structures that will give a lot of ple
pleasure if intellectual pleasure is something that we, um, we
NOTE CONF
want to gain.
Pleasure.
NOTE CONF
All right, I think, uh, uh, yes sir, I'll take
on that question.
NOTE CONF
Say that again.
Plus the multiplicity, right?
NOTE CONF
What does it mean?
OK, so why did I write O plus multiplicity time?
NOTE CONF
Anyone?
Yes So I think the point there is that You
NOTE CONF
would identify the start end points in OM time.
But then you have to say, where does it appear?
NOTE CONF
Then you have to travel from start to end to,
in the suffix array to print out those values, right?
NOTE CONF
So number of times you would traverse would be the
size of the the endpoint minus start point plus 1,
NOTE CONF
which is the multiplicity.
So OM to search the number of instances, the multiplicity
NOTE CONF
will be that extra thing.
So this is called an input dependent complexity in computer
NOTE CONF
science where.
I mean, usually you don't ever have to include that
NOTE CONF
because multiplicity is, it is, it is what it is,
right?
NOTE CONF
In the worst case, the multiplicity is the whole text.
If you're searching for.
NOTE CONF
Nothing, nothing appears everywhere or some character in a redundant
text where it appears everywhere.
NOTE CONF
But there is some effort that to print out these
things, identifying where they appear because you're using the range
NOTE CONF
start point end point, which is order M, that effort.
And you traverse suffix array of start point, suffix array
NOTE CONF
of start point plus 1, suffix array of start point
plus 2 all the way to suffix array of, of
NOTE CONF
endpoint.
You're going through that range in the suffix array, and
NOTE CONF
that is basically where that multiplicity comes, comes into play.
And that is really dependent on the input.
NOTE CONF
So that's why, that's why it's called the input dependent
complexity.
NOTE CONF
So that multiplicity is a function of the input, right,
or the pattern, whatever the pattern in the text that
NOTE CONF
you have, you have.
All right, fantastic, we've finished on time.
NOTE CONF
Um, just 11 thing for, have you covered suffix trees
in 2004 in, and you have done the method of
NOTE CONF
compressing a try into a tree, correct?
Please revise that.
NOTE CONF
I will make a post.
Um, uh, next lecture, I'll just say this, just 11
NOTE CONF
moment, just hold, hold your horse, just one moment.
So next, so that everyone can hear me in the,
NOTE CONF
in the mic as well for next week, just prepare
that, make sure that you kind of review what a
NOTE CONF
suffix tree stores.
And I will, I will tell you that it is
NOTE CONF
perhaps that it's an incredibly beautiful algorithm, Eukanins, but nuancedly
beautiful.
NOTE CONF
So I wanted you to get a sense of something
that's beautiful and sort of easy to digest or easy
NOTE CONF
to digest if you put some effort, and something that
will, will force you to think a bit hard.
NOTE CONF
So perhaps that will be the hardest algorithm you will
learn, which is next week, but come prepared and it'll
NOTE CONF
make it easy.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
My pleasure.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I.
My pleasure.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, so essentially this 30.